Top Down Operator Precedence
============================

[Douglas Crockford](http://www.crockford.com/)

2007-02-21

Introduction
------------


[Vaughan Pratt](http://boole.stanford.edu/pratt.html) presented ["Top
Down Operator Precedence"](http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=512931)
at the first annual [Principles of Programming Languages
Symposium](http://www.acm.org/sigs/sigplan/popl.htm) in Boston in 1973.
In the paper Pratt described a parsing technique that combines the best
properties of Recursive Descent and
[Floyd](http://sigact.acm.org/floyd/)'s Operator Precedence. It is easy
to use. It feels a lot like Recursive Descent, but with the need for
less code and with significantly better performance. He claimed the
technique is simple to understand, trivial to implement, easy to use,
extremely efficient, and very flexible. It is dynamic, providing support
for truly extensible languages.

Oddly enough, such an obviously utopian approach to compiler
construction is completely neglected today. Why is this? Pratt suggested
in the paper that a preoccupation with BNF grammars and their various
offspring, along with their related automata and theorems, has precluded
development in directions that are not visibly in the domain of automata
theory.

Another explanation is that his technique is most effective when used in
a dynamic, functional programming language. Its use in a static,
procedural language would be considerably more difficult. In the paper,
Pratt used LISP and almost effortlessly built parse trees from streams
of tokens. But parsing techniques are not greatly valued in the LISP
community, which celebrates the Spartan denial of syntax. There have
been many attempts since LISP's creation to give the language a rich
ALGOL-like syntax, including [Pratt's
CGOL](http://zane.brouhaha.com/%7Ehealyzh/doc/cgol.doc.txt), [LISP
2](http://community.computerhistory.org/scc/projects/LISP/index.html#LISP_2_),
[MLISP](ftp://reports.stanford.edu/pub/cstr/reports/cs/tr/68/92/CS-TR-68-92.pdf),
[Dylan](http://www.opendylan.org/), [Interlisp's
Clisp](http://community.computerhistory.org/scc/projects/LISP/interlisp/Teitelman-3IJCAI.pdf),
and [McCarthy's original
M-expressions](http://www-formal.stanford.edu/jmc/history/lisp/lisp.html).
All failed to find acceptance. That community found the correspondence
between programs and data to be much more valuable than expressive
syntax. But the mainstream programming community likes its syntax, so
LISP has never been accepted by the mainstream. Pratt's technique wants
a dynamic language, but dynamic language communities historically have
had no use for the syntax that Pratt's technique conveniently realizes.

JavaScript
----------

The situation changes with the advent of JavaScript. JavaScript is a
dynamic, functional language, but syntactically it is obviously a member
of the C family. It is a dynamic language with a community that likes
syntax.

JavaScript is also object-oriented. Pratt's 1973 paper anticipated
object orientation but lacked an expressive notation for it. JavaScript
is an ideal language for exploiting Pratt's technique. I will show that
we can quickly and inexpensively produce parsers in JavaScript.

We don't have time in this short chapter to deal with the whole
JavaScript language, and perhaps we wouldn't want to because the
language is a mess. But it has some brilliant stuff in it that is well
worth consideration. We will build a parser that can process Simplified
JavaScript. We will write the parser in Simplified JavaScript.
Simplified JavaScript is just the good stuff, including:

-   Functions as first class objects. Functions in Simplified JavaScript
    are lambdas with lexical scoping.
-   Dynamic objects with prototypal inheritance. Objects are class-free.
    We can add a new member to any object by ordinary assignment. An
    object can inherit members from another object.
-   Object literals and array literals. This is a very convenient
    notation for creating new objects and arrays. JavaScript literals
    were the inspiration for the [JSON](http://www.json.org/) data
    interchange format.

We will take advantage of JavaScript's prototypal nature to make token
objects that inherit from symbols. Our implementation depends on an
`Object.create` method (which makes a new object that inherits members
from an existing object) and a tokenizer (which produces an array of
simple token objects from a string). We will advance through this array
of tokens as we grow our parse tree.

Symbol Table
------------

Every token, such as an operator or identifier, will inherit from a
symbol. We will keep all of our symbols (which determine the types of
tokens in our language) in a `symbol_table` object.

```javascript
    var symbol_table = {};
``` 

The `original_symbol` object is the prototype for all other symbols. Its
methods will usually be overridden. (We will describe the role of `nud`
and `led` and binding powers in the section on Precedence below).

```javascript
    var original_symbol = {
        nud: function () {
            this.error("Undefined.");
        },
        led: function (left) {
            this.error("Missing operator.");
        }
    };
```
Let's define a function that makes symbols. It takes a symbol `id` and
an optional binding power that defaults to 0 and returns a symbol object
for that `id`. If the symbol already exists in the `symbol_table`, the
function returns that symbol object. Otherwise, it makes a new symbol
object that inherits from the `original_symbol`, stores it in the symbol
table, and returns it. A symbol object initially contains an `id`, a
value, a left binding power, and the stuff it inherits from the
`original_symbol`.

```javascript
    var symbol = function (id, bp) {
        var s = symbol_table[id];
        bp = bp || 0;
        if (s) {
            if (bp >= s.lbp) {
                s.lbp = bp;
            }
        } else {
            s = Object.create(original_symbol);
            s.id = s.value = id;
            s.lbp = bp;
            symbol_table[id] = s;
        }
        return s;
    };
```
The following symbols are popular separators and closers.

```javascript
    symbol(":");
    symbol(";");
    symbol(",");
    symbol(")");
    symbol("]");
    symbol("}");
    symbol("else");
```
The `(end)` symbol indicates the end of the token stream. The `(name)`
symbol is the prototype for new names, such as variable names. The
parentheses that I've included in the ids of these symbols avoid
collisions with user-defined tokens.

```javascript
    symbol("(end)");
    symbol("(name)");
```
Tokens
------

We assume that the source text has been transformed into an array of
simple token objects (`tokens`), each containing a `type` member
(`"name"`, `"string"`, `"number"`, or `"operator"`), and a `value`
member, which is a string or number.

The `token` variable always contains the current token.

```javascript
    var token;
```

The `advance` function makes a new token object from the next simple
token in the array and assigns it to the ` token` variable. It can take
an optional `id` parameter which it can check against the `id` of the
previous token. The new token object's prototype is a `(name)` token in
the current scope or a symbol from the symbol table. The new token's
`arity` is `"name"`, `"literal"`, or `"operator"`. Its `arity` may be
changed later to `"binary"`, `"unary"`, or `"statement"` when we know
more about the token's role in the program.

```javascript
    var advance = function (id) {
        var a, o, t, v;
        if (id && token.id !== id) {
            token.error("Expected '" + id + "'.");
        }
        if (token_nr >= tokens.length) {
            token = symbol_table["(end)"];
            return;
        }
        t = tokens[token_nr];
        token_nr += 1;
        v = t.value;
        a = t.type;
        if (a === "name") {
            o = scope.find(v);
        } else if (a === "operator") {
            o = symbol_table[v];
            if (!o) {
                t.error("Unknown operator.");
            }
        } else if (a === "string" || a ===  "number") {
            a = "literal";
            o = symbol_table["(literal)"];
        } else {
            t.error("Unexpected token.");
        }
        token = Object.create(o);
        token.value = v;
        token.arity = a;
        return token;
    };
```
Scope
-----

Most languages have some notation for defining new symbols (such as
variable names). In a very simple language, when we encounter a new
word, we might give it a definition and put it in the symbol table. In a
more sophisticated language, we would want to have scope, giving the
programmer convenient control over the lifespan and visibility of a
variable.

A scope is a region of a program in which a variable is defined and
accessible. Scopes can be nested inside of other scopes. Variables
defined in a scope are not visible outside of the scope.

We will keep the current scope object in the `scope` variable.

```javascript
    var scope;
```

The `original_scope` is the prototype for all scope objects. It contains
a `define` method that is used to define new variables in the scope. The
`define` method transforms a name token into a variable token. It
produces an error if the variable has already been defined in the scope
or if the name has already been used as a reserved word.

```javascript
    var itself = function () {
        return this;
    };
```
```javascript
    var original_scope = {
        define: function (n) {
            var t = this.def[n.value];
            if (typeof t === "object") {
                n.error(t.reserved ?
                    "Already reserved." :
                    "Already defined.");
            }
            this.def[n.value] = n;
            n.reserved = false;
            n.nud      = itself;
            n.led      = null;
            n.std      = null;
            n.lbp      = 0;
            n.scope    = scope;
            return n;
        },
```
The `find` method is used to find the definition of a name. It starts
with the current scope and seeks, if necessary, back through the chain
of parent scopes and ultimately to the symbol table. It returns
`symbol_table["(name)"]` if it cannot find a definition.

The `find` method tests the values it finds to determine that they are
not `undefined` (which would indicate an undeclared name) and not a
function (which would indicate a collision with an inherited method).

```javascript
        find: function (n) {
                var e = this, o;
                while (true) {
                    o = e.def[n];
                    if (o && typeof o !== 'function') {
                        return e.def[n];
                    }
                    e = e.parent;
                    if (!e) {
                        o = symbol_table[n];
                        return o && typeof o !== 'function' ?
                                o : symbol_table["(name)"];
                    }
                }
            },
```
The `pop` method closes a scope, giving focus back to the parent.

```javascript
        pop: function () {
            scope = this.parent;
        },
```
The `reserve` method is used to indicate that a name has been used as a
reserved word in the current scope.

```javascript
        reserve: function (n) {
            if (n.arity !== "name" || n.reserved) {
                return;
            }
            var t = this.def[n.value];
            if (t) {
                if (t.reserved) {
                    return;
                }
                if (t.arity === "name") {
                    n.error("Already defined.");
                }
            }
            this.def[n.value] = n;
            n.reserved = true;
        }
    };
```
We need a policy for reserved words. In some languages, words that are
used structurally (such as `if`) are reserved and cannot be used as
variable names. The flexibility of our parser allows us to have a more
useful policy. For example, we can say that in any function, any name
may be used as a structure word or as a variable, but not as both. We
will reserve words locally only after they are used as reserved words.
This makes things better for the language designer because adding new
structure words to the language will not break existing programs, and it
makes things better for programmers because they are not hampered by
irrelevant restrictions on the use of names.

Whenever we want to establish a new scope for a function or a block we
call the `new_scope` function, which makes a new instance of the
original scope prototype.

```javascript
    var new_scope = function () {
        var s = scope;
        scope = Object.create(original_scope);
        scope.def = {};
        scope.parent = s;
        return scope;
    };
```
Precedence
----------

Tokens are objects that bear methods allowing them to make precedence
decisions, match other tokens, and build trees (and in a more ambitious
project, also check types and optimize and generate code). The basic
precedence problem is this: Given an operand between two operators, is
the operand bound to the left operator or the right?

` d `*A*` e `*B*` f`

If *A* and *B* are operators, does operand `e` bind to *A* or to *B*? In
other words, are we talking about

` (d `*A*`   e) `*B*` f   `or`   d `*A*` (e `*B*`   f) `?

Ultimately, the complexity in the process of parsing comes down to the
resolution of this ambiguity. The technique we will develop here uses
token objects whose members include binding powers (or precedence
levels), and simple methods called `nud` (null denotation) and `led`
(left denotation). A `nud` does not care about the tokens to the left. A
`led` does. A ` nud` method is used by values (such as variables and
literals) and by prefix operators. A `led` method is used by infix
operators and suffix operators. A token may have both a `nud` method and
a ` led` method. For example, `-` might be both a prefix operator
(negation) and an infix operator (subtraction), so it would have both
`nud` and `led` methods.

In our parser, we will use these binding powers:


<table border="2" align="center"><tbody>
  <tr>
    <td>0</td>
    <td>non-binding operators like <code><code>;</code></code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>10</td>
    <td>assignment operators like <code><code>=</code></code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>20</td>
    <td><code><code>?</code></code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>30</td>
    <td><code>|| &amp;&amp;</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>40</td>
    <td>relational operators like <code>===</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>50</td>
    <td><code>+ -</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>60</td>
    <td><code>* /</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>70</td>
    <td>unary operators like <code>!</code></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>80</td>
    <td><code>. [ (</code></td>
  </tr></tbody>
</table>

Expressions
-----------

The heart of Pratt's technique is the `expression` function. It takes a
right binding power that controls how aggressively it binds to tokens on
its right.

```javascript
    var expression = function (rbp) {
        var left;
        var t = token;
        advance();
        left = t.nud();
        while (rbp < token.lbp) {
            t = token;
            advance();
            left = t.led(left);
        }
        return left;
    }
```
`expression` calls the `nud` method of the `token`. The `nud` is used to
process literals, variables, and prefix operators. Then as long as the
right binding power is less than the left binding power of the next
token, the `led` method is invoked on the following token. The `led` is
used to process infix and suffix operators. This process can be
recursive because the `nud` and `led` methods can call `expression`.

Infix Operators
---------------

The `+` operator is an infix operator, so it has a `   led` method that
weaves the token object into a tree whose two branches (`first` and
`second`) are the operand to the left of the `+` and the operand to the
right. The left operand is passed into the `led`, which then obtains the
right operand by calling the `expression` function.

```javascript
    symbol("+", 50).led = function (left) {
        this.first = left;
        this.second = expression(50);
        this.arity = "binary";
        return this;
    };
```
The symbol for `*` is the same as `+` except for the `id` and binding
powers. It has a higher binding power because it binds more tightly.

```javascript
    symbol("*", 60).led = function (left) {
        this.first = left;
        this.second = expression(60);
        this.arity = "binary";
        return this;
    };
```
Not all infix operators will be this similar, but many will, so we can
make our work easier by defining an `infix` function that will help us
make symbols for infix operators. The `infix` function takes an `id`, a
binding power, and an optional `led` function. If a `led` function is
not provided, the `infix` function supplies a default `led` that is
useful in most cases.

```javascript
    var infix = function (id, bp, led) {
        var s = symbol(id, bp);
        s.led = led || function (left) {
            this.first = left;
            this.second = expression(bp);
            this.arity = "binary";
            return this;
        };
        return s;
    }
```
This allows a more declarative style for specifying infix operators:

```javascript
    infix("+", 50);
    infix("-", 50);
    infix("*", 60);
    infix("/", 60);
```

`===` is JavaScript's exact equality comparison operator.

```javascript
    infix("===", 40);
    infix("!==", 40);
    infix("<", 40);
    infix("<=", 40);
    infix(">", 40);
    infix(">=", 40);
```

The ternary operator takes three expressions, separated by `?` and `:`.
It is not an ordinary infix operator, so we need to supply its `led`
function.

```javascript
    infix("?", 20, function (left) {
        this.first = left;
        this.second = expression(0);
        advance(":");
        this.third = expression(0);
        this.arity = "ternary";
        return this;
    });
```
The `.` operator is used to select a member of an object. The token on
the right must be a name, but it will be used as a literal.

```javascript
    infix(".", 80, function (left) {
        this.first = left;
        if (token.arity !== "name") {
            token.error("Expected a property name.");
        }
        token.arity = "literal";
        this.second = token;
        this.arity = "binary";
        advance();
        return this;
    });
```
The `[` operator is used to dynamically select a member from an object
or array. The expression on the right must be followed by a closing `]`.

```javascript
    infix("[", 80, function (left) {
        this.first = left;
        this.second = expression(0);
        this.arity = "binary";
        advance("]");
        return this;
    });
```
Those infix operators are left associative. We can also make right
associative operators, such as short-circuiting logical operators, by
reducing the right binding power.

```javascript
    var infixr = function (id, bp, led) {
        var s = symbol(id, bp);
        s.led = led || function (left) {
            this.first = left;
            this.second = expression(bp - 1);
            this.arity = "binary";
            return this;
        };
        return s;
    }
```
The `&&` operator returns the first operand if the first operand is
falsy. Otherwise, it returns the second operand. The `||` operator
returns the first operand if the first operand is truthy. Otherwise, it
returns the second operand. (The falsy values are the number `0`, the
empty string `""`, and the values `false` and `null`. All other values
(including all objects) are truthy.)

```javascript
    infixr("&&", 30);
    infixr("||", 30);
```

Prefix Operators
----------------

The code we used for right associative infix operators can be adapted
for prefix operators. Prefix operators are right associative. A prefix
does not have a left binding power because it does not bind to the left.
Prefix operators can also sometimes be reserved words.

```javascript
    var prefix = function (id, nud) {
        var s = symbol(id);
        s.nud = nud || function () {
            scope.reserve(this);
            this.first = expression(70);
            this.arity = "unary";
            return this;
        };
        return s;
    }


    prefix("-");
    prefix("!");
    prefix("typeof");
```
The `nud` of `(` will call `advance(")")` to match a balancing `)`
token. The `(` token does not become part of the parse tree because the
`nud` returns the inner expression.

```javascript
    prefix("(", function () {
        var e = expression(0);
        advance(")");
        return e;
    });
```
Assignment Operators
--------------------

We could use `infixr` to define our assignment operators, but we will
make a specialized `assignment` function because we want it to do two
extra bits of business: examine the left operand to make sure that it is
a proper lvalue, and set an `assignment` member so that we can later
quickly identify assignment statements.

```javascript
    var assignment = function (id) {
        return infixr(id, 10, function (left) {
            if (left.id !== "." && left.id !== "[" &&
                    left.arity !== "name") {
                left.error("Bad lvalue.");
            }
            this.first = left;
            this.second = expression(9);
            this.assignment = true;
            this.arity = "binary";
            return this;
        });
    };


    assignment("=");
    assignment("+=");
    assignment("-=");
```
Notice that we have implemented a sort of inheritance pattern, where
`assignment` returns the result of calling `infixr`, and `infixr`
returns the result of calling `symbol`.

Constants
---------

The `constant` function builds constants into the language. The `nud`
mutates a name token into a literal token.

```javascript
    var constant = function (s, v) {
        var x = symbol(s);
        x.nud = function () {
            scope.reserve(this);
            this.value = symbol_table[this.id].value;
            this.arity = "literal";
            return this;
        };
        x.value = v;
        return x;
    };

    constant("true", true);
    constant("false", false);
    constant("null", null);

    constant("pi", 3.141592653589793);
```

The `(literal)` symbol is the prototype for all string and number
literals. The `nud` method of a literal token returns the token itself.

```javascript
    symbol("(literal)").nud = itself;
```

Statements
----------

Pratt's original formulation worked with functional languages in which
everything is an expression. Most mainstream languages have statements
that are not as nestable as expressions. We can easily handle statements
by adding another method to tokens, the `std` (statement denotation). A
`std` is like a `nud` except that it is used only at the beginning of a
statement.

The `statement` function parses one statement. If the current token has
an `std` method, the token is reserved and the `std` is invoked.
Otherwise,we assume an expression statement terminated with a
semi-colon. For reliability, we will reject an expression statement that
is not an assignment or invocation.

```javascript
    var statement = function () {
        var n = token, v;
        if (n.std) {
            advance();
            scope.reserve(n);
            return n.std();
        }
        v = expression(0);
        if (!v.assignment && v.id !== "(") {
            v.error("Bad expression statement.");
        }
        advance(";");
        return v;
    };
```

The `statements` function parses statements until it sees `(end)` or `}`
which signals the end of a block. The function returns a statement, an
array of statements, or `null` if there were no statements present.

```javascript
    var statements = function () {
        var a = [], s;
        while (true) {
            if (token.id === "}" || token.id === "(end)") {
                break;
            }
            s = statement();
            if (s) {
                a.push(s);
            }
        }
        return a.length === 0 ? null : a.length === 1 ? a[0] : a;
    };
```

The `stmt` function is used to add statement symbols to the symbol
table. It takes a statement `id` and an `std` function.

```javascript
    var stmt = function (s, f) {
        var x = symbol(s);
        x.std = f;
        return x;
    };
```

The block statement wraps a pair of curly braces around a list of
statements, giving them a new scope. (JavaScript does not have block
scope. Simplified JavaScript corrects that.)

```javascript
    stmt("{", function () {
        new_scope();
        var a = statements();
        advance("}");
        scope.pop();
        return a;
    });
```
The block function parses a block.

```javascript
    var block = function () {
        var t = token;
        advance("{");
        return t.std();
    };
```
The `var` statement defines one or more variables in the current block.
Each name can optionally be followed by `=` and an initializing
expression.

```javascript
    stmt("var", function () {
        var a = [], n, t;
        while (true) {
            n = token;
            if (n.arity !== "name") {
                n.error("Expected a new variable name.");
            }
            scope.define(n);
            advance();
            if (token.id === "=") {
                t = token;
                advance("=");
                t.first = n;
                t.second = expression(0);
                t.arity = "binary";
                a.push(t);
            }
            if (token.id !== ",") {
                break;
            }
            advance(",");
        }
        advance(";");
        return a.length === 0 ? null : a.length === 1 ? a[0] : a;
    });
```
The `while` statement defines a loop. It contains an expression in
parens and a block.

```javascript
    stmt("while", function () {
        advance("(");
        this.first = expression(0);
        advance(")");
        this.second = block();
        this.arity = "statement";
        return this;
    });
```
The `if` statement allows for conditional execution. If we see the
` else` symbol after the block, then we parse the next block or `if`
statement.

```javascript
    stmt("if", function () {
        advance("(");
        this.first = expression(0);
        advance(")");
        this.second = block();
        if (token.id === "else") {
            scope.reserve(token);
            advance("else");
            this.third = token.id === "if" ? statement() : block();
        } else {
            this.third = null;
        }
        this.arity = "statement";
        return this;
    });
```
The `break` statement is used to break out of loops.

```javascript
    stmt("break", function () {
        advance(";");
        if (token.id !== "}") {
            token.error("Unreachable statement.");
        }
        this.arity = "statement";
        return this;
    });
```
The `return` statement is used to return from functions. It can take an
optional expression.

```javascript
    stmt("return", function () {
        if (token.id !== ";") {
            this.first = expression(0);
        }
        advance(";");
        if (token.id !== "}") {
            token.error("Unreachable statement.");
        }
        this.arity = "statement";
        return this;
    });
```
Functions
---------

Functions are executable object values. A function has an optional name
(so that it can call itself recursively), a list of parameter names
wrapped in parens, and a body that is a list of statements wrapped in
curly braces. A function has its own scope.

```javascript
    prefix("function", function () {
        var a = [];
        new_scope();
        if (token.arity === "name") {
            scope.define(token);
            this.name = token.value;
            advance();
        }
        advance("(");
        if (token.id !== ")") {
            while (true) {
                if (token.arity !== "name") {
                    token.error("Expected a parameter name.");
                }
                scope.define(token);
                a.push(token);
                advance();
                if (token.id !== ",") {
                    break;
                }
                advance(",");
            }
        }
        this.first = a;
        advance(")");
        advance("{");
        this.second = statements();
        advance("}");
        this.arity = "function";
        scope.pop();
        return this;
    });
```
Functions are invoked with the `(` operator. It can take zero or more
comma separated arguments. We look at the left operand to detect
expressions that cannot possibly be function values.

```javascript
    infix("(", 80, function (left) {
        var a = [];
        if (left.id === "." || left.id === "[") {
            this.arity = "ternary";
            this.first = left.first;
            this.second = left.second;
            this.third = a;
        } else {
            this.arity = "binary";
            this.first = left;
            this.second = a;
            if ((left.arity !== "unary" || left.id !== "function") &&
                    left.arity !== "name" && left.id !== "(" &&
                    left.id !== "&&" && left.id !== "||" && left.id !== "?") {
                left.error("Expected a variable name.");
            }
        }
        if (token.id !== ")") {
            while (true)  {
                a.push(expression(0));
                if (token.id !== ",") {
                    break;
                }
                advance(",");
            }
        }
        advance(")");
        return this;
    });
```
The `this` symbol is a special variable. In a method invocation, it is
the reference to the object.

```javascript
    symbol("this").nud = function () {
        scope.reserve(this);
        this.arity = "this";
        return this;
    };
```
Object Literals
---------------

An array literal is a set of square brackets around zero or more
comma-separated expressions. Each of the expressions is evaluated, and
the results are collected into a new array.

```javascript
    prefix("[", function () {
        var a = [];
        if (token.id !== "]") {
            while (true) {
                a.push(expression(0));
                if (token.id !== ",") {
                    break;
                }
                advance(",");
            }
        }
        advance("]");
        this.first = a;
        this.arity = "unary";
        return this;
    });
```
An object literal is a set of curly braces around zero or more
comma-separated pairs. A pair is a key/expression pair separated by a
colon (`:`). The key is a literal or a name which is treated as a
literal.

```javascript
    prefix("{", function () {
        var a = [];
        if (token.id !== "}") {
            while (true) {
                var n = token;
                if (n.arity !== "name" && n.arity !== "literal") {
                    token.error("Bad key.");
                }
                advance();
                advance(":");
                var v = expression(0);
                v.key = n.value;
                a.push(v);
                if (token.id !== ",") {
                    break;
                }
                advance(",");
            }
        }
        advance("}");
        this.first = a;
        this.arity = "unary";
        return this;
    });
```
Things to Do and Think About
----------------------------

The tree could be passed to a code generator, or it could be passed to
an interpreter. Very little computation is required to produce the tree.
And as we saw, very little effort was required to write the programming
that built the tree.

We could make the `infix` function take an opcode that would aid in code
generation. We could also have it take additional methods that would be
used to do constant folding and code generation.

We could add additional statements (such as `for`, `switch`, and `try`),
statement labels, more error checking, error recovery, and lots more
operators. We could add type specification and inference.

We could make our language extensible. With the same ease that we can
define new variables, we can let the programmer add new operators and
new statements.

[Try the demonstration of the parser that was described in this
paper.](http://javascript.crockford.com/tdop/index.html)

Another example of this parsing technique can be found in
[JSLint](http://jslint.com/).

